doc: chip_tool: pairing and commissioner flags (#28358)
project-chip/connectedhomeip: docs/guides/chip_tool_guide.md

    Here, _<onoff\>_ is a `[0/1]` flag, which when set to `1` prints the trace
    data with automation logs to the console.

<hr>

### Commissioner name and ID flags

All CHIP Tool commands can be used together with the following
commissioner-related flags:

-   `--commissioner-name`
-   `--commissioner-nodeid`

> These flags let you inform the Matter device about which commissioner it must
> interact with. They are especially useful in scenarios where you are working
> with more than one fabric, but you can also use it with a single commissioner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These flags let you control which fabric and node id are used for chip-tool when interacting with devices.
They are especially useful in scenarios where you are working
with more than one fabric, but you can also use them with a single chip-tool node identity.
```

#### `--commissioner-name` flag

> As per the CHIP Tool implementation, the commissioners are required to have the

Reviewer: The important part is to document that this controls which fabric is used.

following names: `alpha` for the first one, `beta` for the second one, `gamma`
for the third one, `4` for the fourth one, `5` for the fifth one, and so on.

If you don't use this flag, the CHIP Tool assumes that the command is meant for
the `alpha` commissioner.

**Example of commands:**

```
$ ./chip-tool any subscribe-by-id '0x0028,0x0028,0x0101,0x0028,0x0028,0x0028' '5,6,0,1,2,4' 100 1000 1 '0,0,1,0,0,0' --keepSubscriptions true
$ ./chip-tool any subscribe-by-id '0x0028,0x0028,0x0101,0x0028,0x0028,0x0028' '5,6,0,1,2,4' 100 1000 2 '0,0,1,0,0,0' --keepSubscriptions true --commissioner-name beta
$ ./chip-tool any subscribe-by-id '0x0028,0x0028,0x0101,0x0028,0x0028,0x0028' '5,6,0,1,2,4' 100 1000 3 '0,0,1,0,0,0' --keepSubscriptions true --commissioner-name gamma
```

#### `--commissioner-nodeid` flag

Each commissioner has a node ID that you can use instead of its name when

> providing the commissioning flags.

Reviewer: That's not what the flag does.  What the flag does is that once you have selected a fabric (via --commissioner-name), you can tell chip-tool what node id to use on that fabric via --commissioner-nodeid.  The default behavior if this flag is not specified is to use whatever value is in storage (probably none, unless you set up the storage by hand to have a value), falling back to decimal "112233".

Note that the help text for this flag is correct about its behavior....

> If you don't use this flag, the CHIP Tool assumes that the command is meant for

Reviewer: "command is meant" sounds like _where_ you are sending the command.  This is about _who_ is sending the command.

the `alpha` commissioner with the default node ID `112233`.

**Example of commands:**

```
chip-tool pairing ble-thread 12378411096372871992 hex:0e08000000000001000035060004001fffe00708fd6be52118a6b9000410205c6257d29b2115d3065fdb6e855f830c0402a0f7f8000300000d0102adda02081111111122224589051000aa22dd445566778899aabbccddeeff030a4f70656e546872656164 20202021 3840 --commissioner-name alpha --commissioner-nodeid 123321
```

```

> any subscribe-by-id '0x0028,0x0028,0x0101,0x0028,0x0028,0x0028' '5,6,0,1,2,4' 100 1000 3 '0,0,1,0,0,0' --keepSubscriptions true --commissioner-name gamma --commissioner-nodeid 123321

Reviewer: I would suggest using a different value from the default here.

> any subscribe-by-id '0x0028,0x0028,0x0101,0x0028,0x0028,0x0028' '5,6,0,1,2,4' 100 1000 3 '0,0,1,0,0,0' --keepSubscriptions true --commissioner-name gamma --commissioner-nodeid 123321

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
chip-tool basicinformation read vendor-id --commissioner-name alpha --commissioner-nodeid 123321
```
We can add note that if the device has been already commissioned by controller's nodeid e.g. 123321 you need to always add such nodeid param, If you don't provide `--commissioner nodeid`, the default value will be taken (112233) and the communication will fail, unless the ACL on the device will be updated.

$ ./chip-tool discover commissioners
```

<hr>

### Pairing

The `pairing` command supports different methods for Matter device commissioning
procedure. The three most common methods are described in the
[Using CHIP Tool for Matter device testing](#using-chip-tool-for-matter-device-testing)
section and are the following:

-   `ble-thread` - For Thread commissioning; described under
    [Commissioning into a Thread network over Bluetooth LE](#commissioning-into-a-thread-network-over-bluetooth-le).
-   `ble-wifi` - For Wi-Fi commissioning; described under
    [Commissioning into a Wi-Fi network over Bluetooth LE](#commissioning-into-a-wi-fi-network-over-bluetooth-le)
-   `onnetwork` - For commissioning the device when it is already present in an
    IP network; described under

>     [Commissioning with setup PIN code](#commissioning-with-setup-pin-code)

Reviewer: Every single one of these is deprecated and ideally should not be used.  The things to use are `code-thread`, `code-wifi`, and `code` unless you are testing some very specific commissioning edge cases.

Reviewer 2: @bzbarsky-apple why these commands are deprecated?
I understand that `code-wifi`, `code`, `code-thread`, is more realistic case for real controller (to commission device using real controller you provide the qr_code payload, manual pairing code, nfc payload), however does it mean that changes that will be applied for `code-thread` commissioning will not be applied for `ble-thread` commissioning command?

Reviewer: > why these commands are deprecated?

Because they are too easy to mess up, and people should generally not use them.  To be clear, "deprecated" means "don't steer people to using these", not "going to remove them".

> does it mean that changes that will be applied for code-thread commissioning will not be applied for ble-thread commissioning command

Generally speaking, changes will be applied to both, if it makes sense.  But in practice, I know people care about making sure `code-thread` does sane things, whereas `ble-thread` the caring is a lot less....

To list all `pairing` sub-commands and commissioning methods, run the following
command:

```
$ ./chip-tool pairing
```

#### Attestation-related flags

The `pairing` commissioning command can be run with several flags that allow you
to modify attestation-related settings:

> -   `--paa-trust-store-path` - Use to provide path to the directory that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   `--paa-trust-store-path` - Use to provide the path to the directory that
```

    contains the information about Product Attestation Authority (PAA)

>     certificate. The path can be absolute or relative to the current working

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    certificates. The path can be absolute or relative to the current working
```

    directory. With this flag, the CHIP Tool looks for the PAA certificate that
    matches the PAI and the DAC certificates programmed on the device. Without
    this flag, the CHIP Tool uses the test PAA certificate.

> -   `--cd-trust-store-path` - Use to provide path to the directory that contains

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   `--cd-trust-store-path` - Use to provide the path to the directory that contains
```

>     the information about Certificate Declaration. The path can be absolute or

Reviewer: No, this is about the things that are trusted to sign certification declarations, not about the certification declarations themselves. Specifically, this path should contain the "well-known Connectivity Standards Alliance certificates" described in "6.3.1. Certification Declaration (CD) Format" in the spec when it's talking about `subjectKeyIdentifier`.  Or does it contain the keys, not the certificates?  This part needs to be made very clear.

Reviewer 2: Can we create a custom key to generate custom Certification Declaration.
@bzbarsky-apple do you know how to create such signing key?

Reviewer 2: so this path shall contain the key which is used to generate CD
chip-cert gen-cd --key **credentials/test/certification-declaration/Chip-Test-CD-Signing-Key.pem** --cert credentials/test/certification-declaration/Chip-Test-CD-Signing-Cert.pem --out CD.der .....
This file which is bolded.

Reviewer: @doublemis1 Yes, that looks like a plausible command to create a CD signed with the test CD signing cert...

    relative to the current working directory. With this flag, the CHIP tool
    looks for the CD that matches other attestation data on the device. Without
    this flag, the CHIP Tool uses the test CD.

> -   `--only-allow-trusted-cd-keys` - Use to only allow trusted CD verifying keys

Reviewer: Specifically, this is to be used when you _only_ want the keys from `--cd-trust-store-path` and not the built-in test key.  This dependency between the two flags should be documented.

    (disallow test keys). If the flag is not provided or it is provided with the
    value `0` ("false"), untrusted CD verifying keys are allowed. If it is
    provided with the value `1` ("true", `--only-allow-trusted-cd-keys 1`), test
    keys are disallowed and CD used for attestation will not be accepted. This
    setting is parsing CD for an `int` enumeration that sets the test status of
    CD.

-   `--bypass-attestation-verifier` - Use to bypass the attestation verifier. If

>     the flag is not provided or it is provided with the value `0` ("false"), the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    the flag is not provided or it is provided with the value `false`, the
```
Same elsewhere.  For boolean flags, `false` and `true` are the values people should be providing.  `0` and `1` are supported only for compat with old test scripts and at some point we would like to consider removing them.

    attestation verifier is not bypassed. If it is provided with the value `1`
    ("true", `--bypass-attestation-verifier 1`), the commissioning will continue
    in case of the attestation verification failure. The failure can be caused
    by errors in Certification Declaration, the PAA or the PAI certificates, or

>     in the Device Attestation Certificate. This option can be useful is you want

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    in the Device Attestation Certificate. This option can be useful if you want
```

    to quickly commission a device with the PAI and the DAC certificates that

>     are based on an unknown PAI certificate, or when using a CD to which we

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    are based on an unknown PAA certificate, or when using a CD to which we
```

    don't have access (for example it is part of an officially certified

>     device).

Reviewer: I don't understand why we would need "access" to the CD.  This part does not make sense.

Reviewer 2: I think it is connected with this comment:
https://github.com/project-chip/connectedhomeip/pull/28358/files/232b0248a7307e54f605112a4de8f5edbc77dabe#r1277781710
bypass-attestation should be used if we don't have access to Certification Declaration signing key.

Reviewer: The "CD signing key" is not the same thing as "the CD".

```
$ ./chip-tool pairing code-wifi 1 wifi_test admin123 34970112332
```

The following command commissions the device with the node ID `1` to the Matter fabric.
The onboarding dataset payload `MT:8IXS142C00KA0648G00` (QR code payload) is used to discover and commission the device.

```
$ ./chip-tool pairing code 1 MT:8IXS142C00KA0648G00
```

#### Attestation-related flags

The `pairing` commissioning command can be run with several flags that allow you
to modify attestation-related settings:

-   `--paa-trust-store-path` - Use to provide the path to the directory that
    contains the information about Product Attestation Authority (PAA)
    certificates. The path can be absolute or relative to the current working
    directory. With this flag, the CHIP Tool looks for the PAA certificate that
    matches the PAI and the DAC certificates programmed on the device. Without
    this flag, the CHIP Tool uses the built-in test PAA certificate.

-   `--cd-trust-store-path` - Use to provide the path to the directory containing the key that
    is used to validate the device's Certification Declaration. The path can be absolute or

>     relative to the current working directory. With this flag, the CHIP tool
>     looks for the public key that successfully validate device Certification Declaration's signature.
>     Without this flag, the CHIP Tool uses well-known built-in public keys 
>     (built-in public keys `src/credentials/attestation_verifier/DefaultDeviceAttestationVerifier.cpp`)

Reviewer: Again: _this is not the behavior_.  The right behavior is more like:
```suggestion
    relative to the current working directory. With this flag, the CHIP tool
    looks for additional public keys, in addition to the well-known built-in public keys 
    (built-in public keys `src/credentials/attestation_verifier/DefaultDeviceAttestationVerifier.cpp`),
    to be used to validate Certification Declaration signatures.
```

-   `--only-allow-trusted-cd-keys` - Use to only allow the keys from `--cd-trust-store-path`
    and not the built-in test key. If the flag is not provided or it is provided with the
    value `false`, untrusted CD verifying keys are allowed. If it is
    provided with the value `true` (`--only-allow-trusted-cd-keys true`), test
    keys are disallowed and CD signed with the test key will not be accepted.

-   `--bypass-attestation-verifier` - Use to bypass the attestation verifier. If
    the flag is not provided or it is provided with the value `false`, the
    attestation verifier is not bypassed. If it is provided with the value `true`
    (`--bypass-attestation-verifier true`), the commissioning will continue
    in case of the attestation verification failure. The failure can be caused
    by errors in Certification Declaration, PAA or PAI certificates, or
    in the Device Attestation Certificate. This option can be helpful if you want
    to quickly commission a device with PAI and DAC certificates based on

>     not known PAA and/or with not known Certification Declaration public key.

Reviewer: A Certification Declaration does not have a "public key", so this is very confusing.  How about:
```suggestion
    an unknown PAA and/or with a Certification Declaration signed by an unknown key.
```

    looks for the CD that matches other attestation data on the device. Without
    this flag, the CHIP Tool uses the test CD.

-   `--only-allow-trusted-cd-keys` - Use to only allow the keys from `--cd-trust-store-path`
    and not the built-in test key. If the flag is not provided or it is provided with the
    value `false`, untrusted CD verifying keys are allowed. If it is
    provided with the value `true` (`--only-allow-trusted-cd-keys true`), test
    keys are disallowed and CD used for attestation will not be accepted. This
    setting is parsing CD for an `int` enumeration that sets the test status of
    CD.

-   `--bypass-attestation-verifier` - Use to bypass the attestation verifier. If
    the flag is not provided or it is provided with the value `false`, the
    attestation verifier is not bypassed. If it is provided with the value `true`
    (`--bypass-attestation-verifier true`), the commissioning will continue
    in case of the attestation verification failure. The failure can be caused
    by errors in Certification Declaration, the PAA or the PAI certificates, or
    in the Device Attestation Certificate. This option can be useful if you want

>     to quickly commission a device with the PAI and the DAC certificates that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    to quickly commission a device with PAI and DAC certificates that
```

fabric. The onboarding dataset payload `MT:8IXS142C00KA0648G00` (QR code
payload) is used to discover and commission the device.

```
$ ./chip-tool pairing code 1 MT:8IXS142C00KA0648G00
```

#### Attestation-related flags

The `pairing` commissioning command can be run with several flags that allow you
to modify attestation-related settings:

-   `--paa-trust-store-path` - Use to provide the path to the directory that
    contains the information about Product Attestation Authority (PAA)
    certificates. The path can be absolute or relative to the current working
    directory. With this flag, the CHIP Tool looks for the PAA certificate that
    matches the PAI and the DAC certificates programmed on the device. Without
    this flag, the CHIP Tool uses the built-in test PAA certificate.

-   `--cd-trust-store-path` - Use to provide the path to the directory
    containing the key that is used to generate the Certification Declaration.
    The path can be absolute or relative to the current working directory. With
    this flag, the CHIP tool looks for the public key that successfully validate
    device Certification Declaration's signature. Without this flag, the CHIP

>     Tool uses the built-in test signing key.

Reviewer: I don't think this matches actual behavior.  Did you speak with someone "very familiar with how CD works" as I asked?  Because as far as I can tell default behavior uses keys other than the test signing key....

-   `--only-allow-trusted-cd-keys` - Use to only allow the keys from
    `--cd-trust-store-path` and not the built-in test key. If the flag is not
    provided or it is provided with the value `false`, untrusted CD verifying
    keys are allowed. If it is provided with the value `true`
    (`--only-allow-trusted-cd-keys true`), test keys are disallowed and CD
    signed with the test key will not be accepted.

-   `--bypass-attestation-verifier` - Use to bypass the attestation verifier. If
    the flag is not provided or it is provided with the value `false`, the
    attestation verifier is not bypassed. If it is provided with the value
    `true` (`--bypass-attestation-verifier true`), the commissioning will
    continue in case of the attestation verification failure. The failure can be
    caused by errors in Certification Declaration, the PAA or the PAI
    certificates, or in the Device Attestation Certificate. This option can be

>     helpful if you want to quickly commission a device with the PAI and the DAC

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    helpful if you want to quickly commission a device with PAI and DAC
```
This was also in the previous review....

    certificates based on non-test PAA and Certification Declaration signed by

>     non-test signing key.

Reviewer: Again, I don't think this matches actual behavior.
